tools/tagger/README.md, before:

# Tagger and lemmatiser for Croatian, Slovene and Serbian

## Dependencies

Python modules:

* sklearn(>=0.15) (necessary only if you want to perform lemmatisation as well)
* marisa_trie
* pycrfsuite

## Running the tagger

If you have all the files in place for tagging (for Croatian `hr.msd.model` and `hr.marisa`), you can run the tagger like this:

```
$ ./tagger.py hr
Moj
alat
radi
dobro
.

CTRL+D
Moj	Ps1msn
alat	Ncmsn
radi	Vmr3s
dobro	Rgp
.	Z
```

You can, of course, send the data to be tagged to stdin. Additionally, there is a tokeniser in this toolkit, so probably the most convenient way of running the tagger is this:

```
$ echo 'Moj alat radi dobro.' | ../tokeniser/tokeniser.py hr | ./tagger.py hr
1.1.1.1-3	Moj	Ps1msn
1.1.2.5-8	alat	Ncmsn
1.1.3.10-13	radi	Vmr3s
1.1.4.15-19	dobro	Rgp
1.1.5.20-20	.	Z
```
Run `./tagger.py -h` for additional options.

If you want to use both the tagger and the lemmatiser, you should train the lemmatiser as described below. At the end of the process, for Croatian you should have the following files: `hr.lexicon` and `hr.lexicon.guesser`.

Once you have everything in place, just add the `-l` flag to the tagger:

```
$ echo 'Moj alat radi dobro.' | ../tokeniser/tokeniser.py hr | ./tagger.py hr -l
1.1.1.1-3	Moj	Ps1msn	moj
1.1.2.5-8	alat	Ncmsn	alat
1.1.3.10-13	radi	Vmr3s	raditi
1.1.4.15-19	dobro	Rgp	dobro
1.1.5.20-20	.	Z	.
```

## Training your own models

As currently we do not disseminate the lemmatisation models (too large for GitHub), if you want to perform elmmatisation, you should train your own model. Models for tagging are included in this distribution.

### Tagger training data format

The tagger training data should be in the CoNLL format with the token in the second column and the tag in the fifth column.

### Preparing the lexicon trie used by the tagger

The lexicon trie is used both during training the tagger and during tagging.

The examples below cover only Croatian and Serbian as we do not currently distribute the Slovene inflectional lexicon.

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_HR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_marisa.py hr.marisa`

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_SR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_marisa.py sr.marisa`

### Training the tagger

The only argument given to the script is the language code. In case of Croatian (language code `hr`) the corpus training data is expected to be in the file `hr.conll`, while the lexicon trie is expected to be in the file `hr.marisa`.

`$ ./train_tagger.py hr`

`$ ./train_tagger.py sr`

`$ ./train_tagger.py sl`

### Preparing the lexicon for training the lemmatiser

`$ ./lemma_freq.py hr.lemma_freq < training_data/hr.conll`

`$ ./lemma_freq.py sl.lemma_freq < training_data/sl.conll`

`$ ./lemma_freq.py sr.lemma_freq < training_data/sr.conll`

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_HR_purist.mte.gz | awk '{print $1 "\t" $2 "\t" $3}' | ./prepare_lexicon.py hr.lemma_freq hr.lexicon`

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_SR_purist.mte.gz | awk '{print $1 "\t" $2 "\t" $3}' | ./prepare_lexicon.py sr.lemma_freq sr.lexicon`

### Training the lemmatiser

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py hr.lexicon`

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py sr.lexicon`

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py sl.lexicon`

Commit message:

Tagger README and Apertium lexicons updated

tools/tagger/README.md, after:

# Tagger and lemmatiser for Croatian, Slovene and Serbian

## Dependencies

Python modules:

* sklearn(>=0.15) (necessary only if you want to perform lemmatisation as well)
* marisa_trie
* pycrfsuite

## Running the tagger

If you have all the files in place for tagging (for Croatian `hr.msd.model` and `hr.marisa`), you can run the tagger like this:

```
$ ./tagger.py hr
Moj
alat
radi
dobro
.

CTRL+D
Moj	Ps1msn
alat	Ncmsn
radi	Vmr3s
dobro	Rgp
.	Z
```

You can, of course, send the data to be tagged to stdin. Additionally, there is a tokeniser in this toolkit, so probably the most convenient way of running the tagger is this:

```
$ echo 'Moj alat radi dobro.' | ../tokeniser/tokeniser.py hr | ./tagger.py hr
1.1.1.1-3	Moj	Ps1msn
1.1.2.5-8	alat	Ncmsn
1.1.3.10-13	radi	Vmr3s
1.1.4.15-19	dobro	Rgp
1.1.5.20-20	.	Z
```
Run `./tagger.py -h` for additional options.

If you want to use both the tagger and the lemmatiser, you should train the lemmatiser as described below. At the end of the process, for Croatian you should have the following files: `hr.lexicon` and `hr.lexicon.guesser`.

Once you have everything in place, just add the `-l` flag to the tagger:

```
$ echo 'Moj alat radi dobro.' | ../tokeniser/tokeniser.py hr | ./tagger.py hr -l
1.1.1.1-3	Moj	Ps1msn	moj
1.1.2.5-8	alat	Ncmsn	alat
1.1.3.10-13	radi	Vmr3s	raditi
1.1.4.15-19	dobro	Rgp	dobro
1.1.5.20-20	.	Z	.
```

## Training your own models

As currently we do not disseminate the lemmatisation models (too large for GitHub), if you want to perform elmmatisation, you should train your own model. Models for tagging are included in this distribution.

### Tagger training data format

The tagger training data should be in the CoNLL format with the token in the second column and the tag in the fifth column.

### Preparing the lexicon trie used by the tagger

The lexicon trie is used both during training the tagger and during tagging.

The examples below cover only Croatian and Serbian as we do not currently distribute the Slovene inflectional lexicon.

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_HR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_marisa.py hr.marisa`

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_SR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_marisa.py sr.marisa`

### Training the tagger

The only argument given to the script is the language code. In case of Croatian (language code `hr`) the corpus training data is expected to be in the file `hr.conll`, while the lexicon trie is expected to be in the file `hr.marisa`.

`$ ./train_tagger.py hr`

`$ ./train_tagger.py sr`

`$ ./train_tagger.py sl`

### Preparing the lexicon for training the lemmatiser

The first step in producing the lexicon for lemmatisation is to calculate the lemma frequency list from the tagger training data. The data in the same format as for training the tagger should be used.

`$ ./lemma_freq.py hr.lemma_freq < hr.conll`

`$ ./lemma_freq.py sr.lemma_freq < sr.conll`

The second step produces the lexicon in form of a `marisa_trie.BytesTrie`. The lemma frequency information is used in case of `(token,msd)` pair collisions. Only the most frequent lemma is kept in the lexicon.

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_HR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_lexicon.py hr.lemma_freq hr.lexicon`

`$ gunzip -c ../../lexicons/apertium/apertium-hbs.hbs_SR_purist.mte.gz | cut -f 1,2,3 | ./prepare_lexicon.py sr.lemma_freq sr.lexicon`

### Training the lemmatiser

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py hr.lexicon`

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py sr.lexicon`

`$ ./train_lemmatiser.py sl.lexicon`
